Seth, welcome back to Talk Python.
Awesome to have you here.
Thank you for having me, Michael.
Yeah, it's always fun to have you on the show.
You know what?
I don't even think we're going to talk that much about security this episode, are we?
Not too much, no.
As I say that,
I'm sure we're going to come up with something, right?
But the last couple of times I've had you on,
it's because you're doing something with security and Python,
And it's always been very interesting.
It's
true.
Yeah, no, I do a lot of security these days, but I do other things too.
Like be the eyes and ears of everyone who could not attend the Language Summit?
Yeah, so I was the blogger again this year.
I got invited back.
They liked what I did last year.
So they're like, ah, well, we'll have this guy again.
Why not?
Right?
Yeah, it was great.
I mean, I love attending the Language Summit and blogging for it.
It's a really unique way to contribute back to the Python community.
It's such a specific role.
Yeah, it really is.
I think maybe we start there.
Maybe we start with what is the Language Summit
and why are there not just a bunch of videos online
and why aren't there sessions that necessarily open sessions at PyCon, right?
It's kind of a special event.
Yeah, so the Language Summit is, historically, it is this event that happens every year before, right before PyCon US.
It's been hosted in other PyCons as well, but nowadays it happens at PyCon US.
And it occurs kind of at the same time that tutorials are happening.
So that's a day or two before the actual conference starts for most attendees where there's talks and all of that.
And basically what ends up happening is a bunch of core developers and triagers and some special guests all convene into one room for a full day of short talks followed by tons of discussion.
And the reason that it's a closed session is, one, it's a logistical thing.
The room is only so big.
And I'm pretty sure the organizers know that if it was just open session, it would be like, oh, we need to have this huge conference room of people.
And it's not really conducive to discussion.
because it is very fast-moving, asking questions, getting answers,
and having people be able to exchange this information really quickly.
And so to offset the lack of openness, right,
because not everyone can possibly attend that wants to attend,
what ends up happening is a blogger, someone who covers the actual event,
every single talk, every single discussion, all the questions, what gets discussed,
And then like the vibes of the room and like how people are feeling about topics.
That gets covered by a blogger, which this year was me.
Last year was also me.
But then the years prior has been like Alex Waygood covered the year prior to me starting.
So Alex taught me everything I need to know and what to expect and all of that.
Nice.
Yeah.
And I had you on last year and I had Alex on the year before, I believe.
So it's a bit of a tradition.
There we go.
Cool.
And yeah, also people should know it's a working session with the goal of not just presenting ideas,
but making decisions, trying to come to an agreement with the core devs and steering council and maybe other councils, as we'll see, all the councils.
Yeah, yeah, right.
No, it's lots of decision makers in there.
I feel like it tends to be a really great arena
to kind of just get really quick feedback
on either ideas or questions.
Because it's really funny,
one of the talks happened,
not to get into too much detail right away,
but one of the talks happened,
they're like, oh, we have this problem.
We really need more ARM builders for GitHub CI
for this specific reason.
And E. Durbin, Director of Infrastructure at PSF,
was in the room, and they were just like,
oh, I just bought more.
And it's like, oh, great.
That's
awesome.
Quick feedback.
That's the way to make it happen.
That's right.
You know, before we get into that, just maybe it's worth a quick conversation about.
You were actually in New York City.
We just heard a siren go by.
So we now officially know that you're in New York City, right?
Yes.
There's always
something going on there in terms of
noise
or energy or whatever.
for the UN Open Source Conference.
That's super interesting.
What is that?
Yeah, so United Nations Open Source Week.
I got invited to attend through the Sovereign Tech Agency
and also Alpha Omega.
They are collaborating to host a maintain-a-thon,
which is essentially just get a whole bunch of open source project maintainers,
project leaders, governance people,
like people doing more than just security.
So I was there to represent the security perspective.
and also Python, Python Software
Foundation.
And just getting us all together
and trying to talk about really complicated issues
for open source and how open source can be used
to better the world, to be a part of
a more open access world, more open data world.
Those are kind of like the themes.
Specifically the maintain-a-thon was more
like hosting small sessions with lots of discussion,
almost kind of like the language summit where there's a really short
presentation about a topic. I presented on low energy security. So security practices and
processes for projects that don't have access to tons of security expertise. And then like,
what are the, how can we make the situation better for those types of projects?
Oh, very cool. There's, you know, there's a lot of energy for open source in the United States
corporately, but internationally, there's a lot of energy for open source at a governmental level,
way more so than the U.S. I mean, there's little pockets of things like, hey, we'd like to have
some open source initiatives for what we're building in the U.S., but there's, I can't remember what
country's doing it right now, one of the countries is trying to replace basically Microsoft Office and
Windows with something Linux and open source, and there's a lot of stuff like that.
Yeah,
I mean, it's about having sovereignty
over your technology stack, right?
Making sure that you have complete control
and that there's interoperability
and that, yeah, being able to work independently
as like a government agency,
just as important as a company, right?
You
want to make sure
that you're able to control
all the processes and data that are inside
that are important to you.
Sure, and I think we're in a bit of a special situation
being in the U.S., I don't think we have as much of a feeling of,
wouldn't it be nice if we weren't beholden to U.S. companies?
Because we're already beholden to the U.S.
We live here, we pay taxes, we're subject to the rules.
But if you're outside of the U.S.,
most countries and organizations are still beholden to U.S. companies.
And I think that that's a part of the vein of
the ideas there, right?
Yeah, it definitely is a part of it.
being able to do your own thing without worrying about other countries,
what they're doing or what their relationship is with you,
and still being able to interoperate on a global scale, right?
Because a lot of these formats are open and they interoperate,
like PDF, DocX,
they're
all open.
They can be written by any software, not just
Microsoft software.
Yeah, absolutely.
And I guess that's true for the U.S. in terms of software,
but not so much for hardware, right?
We're more in the same boat as everyone else with hardware.
But that is a bit too far down the weeds maybe,
so we don't need to debate that.
But it's super interesting that you're at that conference,
and it sounds really fun.
Yeah, it's a great time.
A lot of really smart people here,
so I'm happy that they let me in.
How'd I get here?
Exactly.
What office did you run for to get elected to that?
Oh,
none. None of them.
Cool.
So let's talk Language Summit.
When we started sort of backstage,
we were trying to plan out some of the themes and stuff.
You talked about there being a couple of major themes
of the Language Summit this year.
And I certainly, reading your write-up,
thought like, wow, multi-threading has got some attention.
Yeah, free-threading was a big part of the Language Summit.
I think it was like a third, somewhere between a third
and a half of the talks touched free threading
or parallelism or the concurrency model of Python.
It was obviously a big theme.
Yeah, what are some of the other themes?
Yeah, so the other ones are things like,
okay, we have all these other platforms for Python.
If you read the last year's Language Summit,
there's kind of this through line of mobile and web,
both kind of got discussed.
And so if you contrast the status of those projects then, what the write-ups were to now, the projects are way further down the line.
So Russell came up and got to say, oh, mobile for Python, both on Android and iOS, are basically here.
And a huge round of applause from all the core devs because they were super successful in achieving the mission that they set out to do back a year ago at the Language Summit where they laid out what their plans were.
so yeah there it will be basically mobile support i think it's for three working i think is the hope
that it's going to be actually like working and you should use it and you can build apps with it
yeah that's really exciting
it
is very exciting yeah
and then the other platform is web obviously so
pyodide is one of the big ones there so if you've heard of like pi script or
jupyter lite uses pyodide both of those platforms like for python on the web
there was this talk about upstreaming the ffi the javascript ffi and some javascript apis
to see python as opposed to keeping them resident in pyodide
and
what that would essentially mean
is that if you ran python compiled for what was it like the like WebAssembly platform you would
able to interact with JavaScript from
the standard library, like the OS module
or something like that.
It's pretty exciting to hear something
like that. And there was also some talk about
apparently recently MicroPython
got web support, and so trying to
unify a little bit the
APIs that the two are using.
Yeah, that's super exciting.
We'll definitely dive into it, but
the fact that MicroPython
got web support
means it's possibly
a good use for
broader web applications, right?
Because PyDyde is awesome,
but it's also something like 10 megs.
Or somewhere
in megs,
and it takes a bit to load up
because it is basically CPython.
Whereas MicroPython is 100K.
And people are used to doing 100K JavaScript,
but not multi-meg JavaScripts for standard stuff.
So yeah, really exciting.
We'll dive into that.
So not surprising.
I thought we could just maybe work our way through the different presentations.
How long is each presentation besides the lightning talks?
Yeah, so each session is, I think it's like 30 minutes.
The talk itself is usually like 10 minutes.
I could actually think of the schedule.
I should know this off the top of my head.
The presentations are super fast.
They're like 10 minutes, and then the rest is discussion.
So it's quite
a quick format.
And your write-up mirrors that, right?
So if people read your post, I'll link to, what I'm going to do is I'm going to link to the meta post, I guess, in the sense of like a meta package.
In that it says, here's all the articles that I wrote up for the Language Summit, so you can jump to the ones you want to see.
And your write-ups mirror that.
It's like, here's what happened in the presentation, and then the discussion that happened below it from all the core devs.
Yeah, it's short presentation,
and then it's just immediately into questions, feedback, all of that.
So it mirrors it.
Yeah.
Cool.
So the first one, I mean, I didn't always write down the names here.
The first one is,
how can we make breaking changes less painful by Itmar Oren?
And so this one, Itmar deploys a bunch of Python code for production at Meta,
and said, you know, going from version, I don't know, 3.11 to 3.12 or 3.12 to 3.13
has breaking changes that can be challenging.
You know, I don't encounter too many breaking changes in upgrading Python versions,
but I also don't have literally millions of lines of code doing intricate things either.
So, all right, this is a pretty edge case, but also an important one, right?
Yeah,
so this talk, I think one of the big things about this talk too is it wasn't just
about like, oh, jumping from one version to one version.
A lot of companies employ like a skip version upgrading style where they'll experience breaking
changes in a slightly different way than a lot of other users where they're jumping from
like 3.11 to 3.13 as opposed
to like 3
.11, 3.12 to 3.13 because upgrading is obviously
this like big task and so they don't want to do it every year maybe they do want to do it every two
years and that's fine for them unless there's some feature that they really need or something like
that but yeah so like anytime that you're upgrading more than one tython version like it just the
breaking changes are obviously twice as many on average yeah
sometimes they even go from 2.7 to
.11. Yes, and on rare occasions
they go from 2.7 to 3.11.
Thankfully that happens less and less.
That's a story from the last decade
thankfully.
This was
talking about
we're not trying to say breaking changes shouldn't happen because we know that they're
important and they're a good way to unblock things and remove pieces of software that we
don't want users using. But trying to make it so that we can almost like quantify how bad a breaking
change will be for users. And then based on that quantization, figure out what we need to do,
maybe extra if it's like a particularly bad breaking change, or if it's just like, oh,
this has been deprecated for five years, and then removing it, or like, there's an easy drop in
replacement that's one-to-one. Those sorts of breaking changes are really easy versus things
like, oh, this behavior changed, and you won't know until runtime, and things like that are way
more difficult. You have to have a test harness that's actually testing all of the possibilities
in the code to know whether you're safe or not versus a syntactical control F, find the bad
function and then replace it.
It could be super subtle,
right? It could be the
runtime things, but it could
also be
the memory
structure of something we put into
a Redis cache via pickling
has changed.
And the cache
version no longer works and
we have to somehow figure out how to completely
delete the cache
and start over. And some web apps
that's a problem
right when they're
under tons of traffic that sort of cold start experience can be
a problem yeah
and there's there's even things that like aren't even part of this gets mentioned
in a future talk about parallelism where it's not even a function of the language but it just
happens to be a property of how a particular set of code executes in one version versus another
so like with the from
the difference between 3
.9 and 3.10 where something is thread safe that it
doesn't look thread safe at all like if you look at the code you're like oh that's not thread safe
but the
gill based
like the implementation of the GIL in 3.9 keeps it thread safe but in 3.10 and
beyond it's no longer thread safe but the thing is you were relying on behavior that's not defined
it wasn't guaranteed yeah there's no guarantee that that and
so
it's like is that
a breaking change
no but also like it'll probably break somebody and also how do you detect that at a syntax level you
can't the syntax is the same
should it be written down as a breaking change i don't know maybe
does it does your code feel broken if it gives you different answers and those answers start
becoming wrong
maybe maybe yeah it's tough it's a really tough thing um i think core developers were
like pretty happy with the idea of like treating different breaking changes differently trying to
develop some sort of taxonomy of breaking changes.
And there was some interesting ideas with like running these like code update scripts,
providing code update scripts that if you have code and there's breaking changes that
are on the syntax level, being able to upgrade them.
Apparently Ruff
had some ability to do this for two major versions of NumPy.
And so like that got brought up as an example of like,
oh, this worked
really well for NumPy.
So maybe Python?
Yeah, absolutely.
Well, I was, yeah, absolutely.
I think rough is certainly in a good position to do that.
Yeah.
You could say this pattern isn't wrong,
but maybe it should come up with a warning just so you know.
Run
this check if you really want to see, right?
Yeah.
Yeah, so one of the things Edmar pointed out was
it's difficult to find the documentation of deprecated
and removed modules because after a module is removed,
the documentation is also removed.
It's a bit of a catch-22.
Yeah, that one was really interesting because, yeah,
especially if you're skipping versions too,
you go to the docs and the module is just gone
and you're kind of left to figure out
what was the last version that had that module,
when did the deprecation warning start,
where is the actual documentation
that
says what to do.
And so, yeah, apparently the docs editorial team
are working on that.
They're trying to figure out a solution
for better documentation for removed modules specifically.
Or removed modules.
Yeah, Carol Williams said they were working on that.
Very interesting.
You can go to the documentation, like docs.python.org,
and pick through it,
but by default it lands on the latest, right?
Yeah, by default it lands on the latest.
And if there are any links to modules or to deprecation links
that aren't pinning to a specific version,
it'll go to the latest
and
be like,
oh, we don't have those docs anymore.
Yeah,
it's just 404.
You're like, huh, weird.
Weird, weird.
Okay, well, very, very interesting.
The next one we have, an uncontentious talk about contention.
And now we start into the heart of the topics,
which is threading, async, IO, parallelism, concurrency, all these things.
And this is the one you were referencing when you ask,
is this code thread safe?
So just give people a sense.
There's an incredibly simple parallel example of create a counter class.
The counter has a value.
You can run some code that goes for 100,000 times, increment the value.
start 10 threads at all, jam on that.
And then this is by Mark Shannon.
He says, we would like this to print exactly 1 million.
I'm not sure that that's necessarily true.
You would, as a creator of this program,
you wouldn't exactly print a million,
but there might be advantages
to allowing code to run more parallel
rather than less parallel.
and say it's on the author of that code
to make it thread safe.
Yeah.
Right.
If
it's five times faster
because Python, the runtime,
doesn't make it thread safe.
Maybe you choose the time
and the way that you run that code.
That's all I'm getting at.
We would like it to print exactly a million times
as a correctness,
but maybe it's not Python's job.
No, I
think maybe
that comment is like
not necessarily like we core developers should want this program to print exactly one million
i think it's more of like oh if you were someone who's writing this code you would maybe
expect
it
to print a million because they're like oh in 3.9 and before it prints a million so like that's fine
uh but then
yeah so you know
what changed in the GIL i actually don't know specifically what
changed in the GIL um it was something to do with context switching uh in the GIL made this
made this no longer change.
My guess is
that
it's performance, like you said.
Yeah, exactly.
Exactly.
They probably said we can make the GIL more fine-grained
and get more perceived cooperative or primitive multi-threading
as it goes,
something like that, right?
Exactly.
Yeah, and that's kind of what I was hinting at there.
Okay, so that's the story.
And basically, Mark said, thread safety is a property of the program,
the Python code you write, or someone's written,
and the implementation of CPython and how it behaves,
in this case, the GIL, right?
Yeah, so Mark was, I think the big thing for Mark's talk
was this synchronization quadrant where he is basically trying
to make some bets about what's going to happen next
to try to solve some of the problems
that we're going to start seeing for parallel Python.
And that's either, anytime that you have
both mutability and shared references,
you have problems with synchronization.
And if you introduce more immutability
or less sharing,
then you're starting to solve these problems.
But the unfortunate thing is that there's a lot of Python
that happens in the shared and mutable section.
And we don't want to have to ask everyone
to rewrite all their Python programs.
So it's definitely a tough quantization problem.
How big of an issue would making changes like this be?
But then also, we don't even really today
give people a ton of the tools that they would need
to be able to work with immutable data structures.
Because you have frozen set,
And we have tuples,
frozen list,
frozen dictionary, any of that.
And so, yeah, Mark just basically gave a whole bunch of things
where it's like, here's all of these ideas that I have
for making this more easy, having more immutability.
And we should probably start thinking about that now
because we're starting to get the free threading time.
Yeah, certainly a threading collections sort of deal would be great.
Yeah, I
think
the
final thing there was like,
oh, we should definitely be doing this on PyPI.
And I think the free threading team is planning on creating
some immutable data structures and putting them on PyPI at first
before...
Oh, yeah, that's an interesting idea.
Take them for a test run before people,
before they get baked into a pattern, right?
Exactly.
You know, one of the things that I think is a danger of those types of data structures, and don't get me wrong, they're useful and they're good.
But one of the dangers is they can give people a false sense of security, right?
If you have four or five lines of code that is changing state,
check to see something that is in the list,
and then in the next line, remove something from the list.
Even if that list itself is thread safe,
if it's immutable, that's one thing.
But if it's a mutable list that you're trying to make a thread safe version of,
it's still possible that the check was thread safe
and they're removed with ThreadSafe.
But something happened between those two
where the thing's no longer in the list, right?
It gives people this sense of,
well, I've got a ThreadSafe collection,
so I'm good to go.
It's like on a line-by-line basis, that's true.
But as a block of code, it's still not true.
And you still have to think more about these things.
That doesn't mean
you shouldn't have them,
but it is like an awareness sort of thing
because I'm doing ThreadSafe.
Look, from system.threading.collections, import, whatever.
We're good to go.
Like, better.
Yeah, yeah.
You actually have to use the data structures.
You can't.
You have to use the immutable ones.
Don't use the immutable ones and expect for
anything.
Yeah, so it's, but it is certainly in the right way.
There was some, there's some pretty extreme in terms of how much they would change programming paradigms and ideas.
Suggestions here.
And I don't remember if they, how things are starting to blend together these different topics.
but yeah, like one of the challenges is that functions and types are mutable, right?
And that makes it hard even at a CPython implementation, runtime level of dealing with some of these things.
But changing them breaks the sort of style of Python somewhat.
Yeah.
That's a trade-off, right?
It's
a huge trade-off, yeah.
And the fact that everything is mutable
and a lot of things are shared,
like the standard library,
the whole standard library is shared across everything.
It's really difficult to say that,
oh yeah, if you're in that top right quadrant
of shared and mutable,
which way does the standard library move?
You can't make everything mutable
and you can't make everything not shared.
So it's what do you do?
Yeah, for sure.
And it's also a performance issue that you could,
because, you know, like right here,
Mark points out that where we build these lots a day,
maybe it is there, but not for a good reason,
like functions and class method resolution order,
all that stuff.
It's mutable, but should it be?
The thing is, if it's going to remain mutable,
you probably have to do locks and stuff down in CPython,
which will slow it down.
If it were immutable, you don't have to lock it.
You can read from multiple threads all day long
and it's not going to hurt anything.
So it's actually a performance consideration,
not just a flexibility, right?
If you say, we really value this multi-threading
and we wanted to operate as quick as regular Python
but scale really well,
these are trade-offs you've got to consider.
But then we all have scars from two to three
and this could be a little like that.
Yeah, I think it's going to matter.
And I think that companies are going to have to maybe start
even profiling their own code and trying to see
where they're hitting those, or stop the world locks
or any sort of performance issue
and trying to track down where in their code
we're hitting those really expensive operations.
And if they're trying to write this extremely high parallel,
code. Having a way
to profile it
sounds really like a good idea
because I think that there's
going to be, once this starts happening,
people are going to have to start thinking about
CPython the runtime.
What are the expensive operations that are
happening in my own code that
maybe
could be done differently
to take advantage of pre-threading completely.
Yeah.
Well, and going back to the
opening part with
like the RedSafe collections and so on.
It's really difficult for us as Python devs to create those
because we could write that in Python,
but that makes it fairly slow.
You need that down at the machine level, right?
Like probably CPython.
We'll see if it's CPython or RPython or whatever
as we go through this series of talks.
But at the time of speaking or recording,
it's CPython, right?
It would be way faster if there was a, in the standard library, C implementation of a thread-safe thing that's not being coordinated by a bunch of calls from the Python level.
Okay.
I guess closing this one out, Mark suggested adding freezing methods to data structures like byte arrays.
That's kind of what we were talking about.
and Barry Warsaw said that he brought up a proposal,
a PEP that was a freeze protocol that was rejected 20 years ago.
Those were different times.
Those were different times, right?
How many cores did we have?
Was it like a dual?
Single digit still.
Yeah,
certainly a single dual, maybe a quad core if you were awesome back then.
That's not the case anymore.
So the benefit of having something like this is certainly higher.
So I was like,
why was that rejected again?
We don't know.
Yeah.
Freezing comes up yet again in another one of the talks about a fearless concurrency as well.
So I think that something like that is probably going to get resurrected, at least tried to be done again.
Yeah.
I don't know if you wanted to jump to that one because I think that
one
in the
uncontentious talk is quite...
Are you talking
fearless concurrency?
Yes.
Yeah, let's talk that one.
So that's by Matthew Parkinson, Tobias Riggstad, and Friedhoff Stoltz.
Hopefully I did justice to your name, folks.
Yeah, so fearless concurrency.
This was one of the more detailed ones.
So this one, I don't know how I feel about this one, Seth.
This is one of those things where it's like if we take this really wild idea
that really changes the way people have traditionally done programming for concurrency,
then we could get great benefits.
But it also is like a – I don't know what your assessment is.
My sense is that most Python people don't think a lot about threading,
haven't done much threading, and their skills of threading, problem-solving,
using fairly straightforward things like locks is still pretty much like,
I think they have those in the language.
You know what I mean?
Like not really like, yeah, oh, yeah, yeah.
I use event signals and all sorts of like producer consumers,
like not very much of that.
You know what I mean?
And so anyway, tell us what this is about because it's an interesting concept.
Yeah,
this concept is all about,
so the central concept is regions.
And regions are essentially,
in Rust, they have this model
where a mutable object is only allowed to be referenced once.
That's the ownership model in Rust.
But that's not compatible with how Python programs are in general.
Because we love our mutability.
And so this is essentially like, okay, well, what if we could have kind of like a looser version of that,
where you have objects that are doing mutability and all of that within a region,
but then anything outside the region can't mess with it.
And then if you have that situation, which is more common and more understandable for a Python programmer,
then you can get a bunch of performance benefits,
because you know that nothing outside of the region
is going to be doing any sort of like that special mutability
just out of nowhere.
We're going to change something about your function signature or something.
And so then when you have this situation,
you can even do the at-links of this diagram
showing all these references into that region from a specific thread.
We know because of how the region is created
that the other thread can't modify anything inside.
and so you get a bunch of performance benefits
for all of the operations that are happening
inside that region.
I think that's kind of like the
elevator tunnel.
Regions are like Rust, but
better for Python programmers.
Yeah, yeah, sure. And if you want some
other thread to have access to it,
you've got to make all the
things in that region and let go of it
so that it can be transferred
ownership over to the other thread
and so on.
Yeah, it's an interesting idea.
Like I said, I feel like it's powerful,
but I feel like it might be a bridge too far, you know?
I don't know.
Yeah, I think that, again, immutability came up here.
They even had some talking about being able to freeze regions,
and so you create a region of objects
and then freeze the entire region of objects,
And then none of those references can get modified.
And so the whole freeze protocol discussion kicked off again.
Yeah, so maybe something to look forward to
for each protocol in Python.
Yeah, the region-based ownership,
it was definitely an interesting thing.
I feel like, yeah, like you said,
there's a bunch of people that were asking questions
about how much is the benefit.
It's this different, like, to take advantage of it,
you would have to change your code slightly
so it's not just this free thing that happens.
It's more of like, okay, if you're a library
or a project that really wants to take advantage
of tons of parallelism, you would use these features.
It wouldn't be just like, oh, every Python programmer.
Once they upgrade, they just get a bunch of free performance.
No, no, of course not.
Of course not.
Yeah, I feel like there was some interesting questions, like interesting discussion, but for some reason I kind of left it out on my notes here.
Let me see.
So one of the things is there's basically four PEPs proposed
or at least imagined.
I don't know if they're actually proposed yet.
No.
That would make this happen.
But maybe it's coming from a different section, but a different freezing conversation somewhere else.
but there was the conversation like, okay, well, I've got a list.
The list has a bunch of pointers.
Some other thread got a hold of one of the items that's somewhere in the list,
but I freeze the list.
And so the list is frozen, but then you still have this object graph
that has leaked some of the mutable data, right?
So you could use that one pointer to one part in the ray and you could be making changes to it.
So there's like this discussion of object graphs as their whole becoming invalid or like they're becoming problems with like trying to share those that were not obvious, right?
Like really subtle
programming challenges.
Not a race condition, but kind of a syntactical structure behavior problem that you run into and you can say, well, this section is frozen.
But someone got a piece of it.
So now what do you say about it?
You know what I mean?
Yeah,
I think the idea with freezing and regions and all that
is it would definitely be tracking the number of references
that are held by objects that are outside of the region.
And so if you would then try to freeze an object or freeze that region,
it would know that it's being referenced by something outside of a region
and it would raise an exception instead of allowing that to happen.
Because right now it would just allow it to happen.
Whereas, like, getting an exception that, hey, a race condition is possible in this situation, we're not going to let you freeze this object or freeze this region.
Like, I think that's, like, a better user experience because if you're using regions, you probably want these properties.
and that is a big benefit of that
proposed idea that
what would have been a
run time either
race condition or deadlock
becomes an exception
that tells you this would have been a problem
which that's massive
yeah so
okay
interesting
my first impression is that it's too much
it's too much for the Python people
and I'm sort of
I'm
not like just throwing shade.
I'm sort of counting myself in the same group to some degree,
even though I've done a lot of like block event-based style threading still.
No, it is interesting.
I think that it is a really good idea for them to break their project down
into multiple peps instead of trying to like land this huge jet plane
at the very end of the project.
Instead, just like try to incrementally.
Because I think that it'll be interesting going into the future
seeing how many of these peps land.
right like will it be all of them or will it be one of them you know like i think there are some
interesting things in this project even if we don't get the entire region-based ownership model
yeah yeah yeah okay interesting jumping back one in time we've got number three of nine so i'm
feeling like we're gonna have to go faster
yes yes we might have
to this one is really interesting
And this was a long conversation, at least a long write-up.
This is the state of free-threaded Python.
And the question is, does it make sense to move to the next phase of PEP 703,
which is, I believe that's the one that defined free-threaded Python by Sim.
So this was done by, this presentation was done by Matt Page,
saying free-threaded Python has come quite far.
And I believe since actually this was done, this PEP has actually moved forward to say,
yes,
we are moving on, right?
So this is a bit of the lag that you were
talking about.
Yes.
So I just shared a link with you also.
This just came through from the steering council how long ago?
A day ago from this recording.
Oh,
yes.
We bring you the fresh news, folks.
Yes.
where PEP779 basically removed the experimental tag
from the free-threaded build.
Yeah, I think that this presentation
probably had a good chunk to do with that,
where they showed off, here's the state of everything,
here's our proof that the community is adopting it
at the expected rate at this point in the project,
especially the scientific computing community,
where the benefits of free-threading are huge.
We're seeing all this uptake.
we're seeing within the bounds of the performance allowance
for single-threaded performance,
can we remove the experimental
so that we can see this next wave of adoption?
That was basically the whole point of math.
So it seems like the answer is yes.
It does seem like it's yes, yeah.
That's very cool.
It means yes for 3.14.
So what was it, June?
That means yes in like four or five months.
Yep.
Stay tuned in October where you get to your stable.
but please test your betas.
Which, yeah, we're already into beta,
aren't we?
Yep, we're already in the beta phase.
So test your betas, folks.
So I guess it's worth pointing out just a little bit
for folks who haven't been tracking this super closely,
like you and I,
this free-threaded Python's PEP 703 deal,
I haven't seen anything like it, but I haven't.
There might have been other stuff like this
and I just didn't notice.
But I'm all about the threading,
so I've been paying more careful attention.
in that it was accepted, but conditionally marked as experimental
and with the caveat that we may take it away from Python later
if we don't like it anymore.
Yeah.
Which is an odd acceptance, I thought.
Yeah, that mechanism of, I think it was just this knowledge
that this project would last multiple steering councils
and
multiple years, and we
were kind of going into the brave unknown
a little bit.
and acknowledging that, that, hey, if it doesn't work out,
we're going to have to pull it all out.
And that is unfortunate, but it's just reality.
We don't
know what we're going
to experience,
but we're going to find it.
It's such a big change.
And so one of those criteria was it can't slow non-threaded Python
down too much, right?
And it looks like that's within 10%.
Unless you're on a Mac, then it doesn't seem to matter
for some reason.
Apple Silicon.
yeah Apple Silicon is magic
but also with memory
right
I think it adds a little bit of a memory overhead
for extra data structures
to track like safe reference
counting and stuff
yeah and actually the new
acceptance criteria for the next stage
actually explicitly mentions
the memory allowance
this
is
like in Dong Hee's
new post
about it is that there's actually an explicit
number now. I don't think there was before. I think it was just tracking the CPU performance.
Yeah, interesting. And I guess it's worth pointing out, there's a couple of resources
that you highlighted here. There's
a resource page by QuantSight, which is a big data science
crew, that talks about what are the
different projects that are relevant, I imagine, to the data science folks.
And what is their status with supporting
being tested, being released for free threads, right?
Yeah.
No, these
sorts of statuses.
And there's also one from Hugo,
which tracks which wheels have
the
free threading available
for just an easy pip install.
And in theory, that kind of means that they've tested,
these projects have tested it with free threading.
Yeah, it looks like we're at 20%, I guess.
Yeah,
we're doing pretty good for this stage of,
like, it's experimental and it might get ripped away.
Like, that was what it was before.
people
are trying it out
this is how you get proof of people willing to try it
I know that inside of the actual language summit discussion
they also talked about wanting to dig in deeper
into this data where it's like
the projects support it but how many users are
installing those wheels to show how much is the community
testing out free threading
just because a project supports it doesn't mean the community is
it out at the same level.
So maybe that'll be
relevant for the future.
I suppose at least for the ones that offer true
free-threaded wheels, you could use PyPI data.
Yep.
The line hall,
Google Cloud, BigQuery, or yeah,
BigQuery.
The BigQuery thing.
There are other ones that are, well, it's just pure Python,
so it probably works.
That's harder to quantify.
Exactly.
So yeah, basically that change came along here.
It says we support moving to what they call phase two,
something like
that.
So there's multiple phases still.
But, yeah, excellent.
We talked about this fearless one.
We're no longer afraid of it.
People are tired of hearing about threading for a minute.
How about governance?
Yeah.
Yeah, so Eric Snow did a presentation entitled
The Challenges of the Steering Council.
That's pretty interesting here.
Tell us about this one.
Yeah, so this one was kind of talking about,
as a core developer,
how is the experience of having a steering council
governing the development of Python?
How is that working out right now?
What are the challenges?
What's the good?
What's the bad?
And I think the highlights are having a completely rotating governance set of people on a council.
Even if that means that most people are still on the council year over year,
you still have that whole complete stoppage of time because people are starting to wind down
because they know an election is coming.
So PEP development gets impacted by that, right?
If you're not timing your PEP authorship right, then sometimes you just get these huge delays.
Also talking about how much the need for consensus impacts people's ability to participate in the discussions.
So before, you could just participate openly.
You don't have to worry about, oh, am I speaking as the steering council or am I speaking as individual or core developer?
But now there's such a need for consensus that it kind of puts steering council members in a weird spot where they can't participate in the discussion unless they've already talked with other people in the steering council or do that as easily.
And I think there was one more.
One of the threads was I had a conversation with somebody who is a core developer but also happens to be on the steering council.
I felt like we were in agreement on this idea.
But then when I spoke to them as steering council member,
then the story changed a little bit because it was a committee response.
And you're like, I think Eric Snow himself expressed frustration that like,
I've worked
on this project.
I thought we had agreement.
And then it turns out for some reason it wasn't, right?
Yeah.
I think, yeah, it's really hard to know if you have consensus when the response is delayed
because you can't tell then if it's consensus because the discussion is slowed down and
no one's bringing up any new points or if it's because people have thoughts but then
they have to talk to their steering council fellow members and then it's difficult to
judge and you don't really want to tip the hat one way or the other during the discussion because
you don't want to get people with false hope you don't want to like tell people not to work on
something when it's actually going to go through so it's it's challenging
yeah two other issues
i guess it's also worth pointing out before i say this that Eric said look things are working pretty
well python hasn't stagnating peps are getting approved things are happening right so that's good
but one challenge is just it's slower to get responses about peps and so on because
it's volunteer committee work rather than one person who can just be the decider you know
yeah it's it is really tough and especially and this kind of comes through with like here's all
these things that are happening to Python all at once. And yeah, good luck, Steering Council,
with trying to make all of those things work together. Because the thing is, is the Steering
Council wants all of these good projects that are happening to Python to all land and to all have a
good time, but they all interdepend on each other. I know that there was like a, like people were
talking about delegation as like a potential solution for this. And I think the Steering
council like loves delegation they want to delegate more but they sometimes have an issue with
delegation when it comes to these topics that like overlap with other big projects that are happening
concurrently in python where you can't delegate someone for three threading because free threading
touches everything and so if you delegate something for free threading then that person
is not looking at all the other projects that are happening in python and that's a problem
yeah yeah i think another two other things i want to touch on real quick
there's a
lot of
interesting stuff in this one
one
is visibility into what's happening in these student council
discussions right and that talks it's a little bit addressing the surprise but also just knowing
kind of like you did for the language summit you brought a lot of visibility and awareness of
what's happening there a lot of this wouldn't be known especially what happened in the discussion
if it weren't for something like that.
So Guido pointed out that California, where he lives,
has the Brown Act, which requires all meetings,
like governmental meetings,
to be open to the public for local governmental groups
in charge of infrastructure without private deliberations
barring personnel issues or something like that.
So basically there's regulations or rules for saying,
like, here's how this stuff is open.
Maybe all the conversations are live, all the meetings are live streamed or who knows, something like that.
Yeah.
No, there was a lot of different
options thrown out there for how to make these meetings or the deliberations or decision making of the steering council more open.
One of them we don't put out there that like, oh, maybe they should just be open.
everyone can see it like a live stream
or like the meeting minutes are just
transcribed instantly
and then published the next day or whatever
like something like that or
because right now they publish meeting
minutes and they're getting
more regularly doing that
like actually getting the meeting minutes out on time
I know there was like some
there was definitely some
issue with that in the past where
like the meeting minutes were really delayed
and so it's really hard to keep
up to date with what actually got discussed
You
want the 2025 version, not the live stream, but you put your AI assistant in all the
meetings.
Sure, yeah.
And let it
creep meeting notes.
Honestly, it probably wouldn't be that bad.
There might be a few things like, oh, you got that wrong.
Sorry.
But in general, I think it would be pretty good.
And then the last thing here is there was some conversation of like, well, the sighted by committee is tough and how much of the community should we listen to?
and somewhere it was proposed that maybe things like discuss.python.org,
we've had polls and people said what they wanted and didn't want, right?
And Barry wisely points out, like, polls are useful,
but there's a whole bunch of people, millions of users,
that are not participating in discourse.
And I just want to take a moment to, like, restate,
I think that Scott Hanselman has such an amazing topic or idea here where he calls,
talks about the dark matter developers, the unseen 99%.
I'll link to this.
So obviously we know what dark matter is in astronomy.
But like these are people who just go to their jobs.
They don't spend their evenings on discussion boards.
They don't go to conferences and participate in panel discussions.
They're not on social media.
They just use Python or whatever language and they do their thing.
and it matters deeply to them,
but you won't ever notice them in these polls
or PSF surveys or whatever
because they just don't do those things.
It was probably a good chunk of them.
Yeah, and the steering council has the
difficult job
of representing these folks too
because they
can't do what's
best for Python
and that's for everybody,
not just people that vote in polls on this.
Right, right.
That's what Barry was saying.
It's tricky though.
It's like, how do you measure that?
You know what I mean?
Yeah, it is super, super tricky.
All right.
packaging. Yeah, so this one was really quite a quick talk where it was mostly just talking about,
hey, this PEP is happening, the packaging governance process. I know that this got discussed
a lot more in the packaging summit. Here, I think it was mostly just like, hey, this is happening.
Here's what the steering council needs to know.
Here's
what core developers need to know.
This whole thing came out of the wheel next directive, which is like wheel next.dev.
they've got their own website and it's basically trying to adopt the steering council model but
for packaging because right now packaging peps tend to be delegated to like one or two people
and obviously if things 10x or 100x in complexity and concurrent projects it is just not possible
for one person to just be doing that work and so trying to adopt a council model so what are the
steering council. I think the biggest open
questions right now are things like
how is that initial council and
how is the voting body going to be
formed? Because the voting body for the
steering council is core developers,
but what is the voting body for
Python packaging?
Right, exactly. And again,
it runs into some of the issues of
delegating
but packaging touches everything
and so on.
Tricky.
Okay, excellent.
And you referenced this one, Python Unmobile,
by Russell,
Keith McGee, and Malcolm Smith.
I just had Russell on the show not too long ago
to talk about some of this work as well.
But he says, after many years,
this year I can say that Python Unmobile is there.
Met with a large round of applause from the room.
Yeah,
it was an awesome moment,
especially because I covered kind of like one of the last status reports
before the big hurrah, we did it.
with Russell and Malcolm.
Yeah, basically both of the peps for Android support
and iOS support are finished,
and they are tracking really, really close
to basically adding tier two support
for iOS and Android to Python,
and tier two support basically means
that if any feature change or bug fix or anything
ends up breaking support for that platform,
then a release can't proceed.
So the platform basically needs to be supported
for a release to happen,
and that's
a huge deal
because it means that people can be confident
that support isn't going to just be taken away
or not surprised it doesn't work, which is great.
So basically it just means there's a whole new,
hopefully a whole new set of users
that can use Python to build on these mobile platforms.
Yeah, that'd be great.
So specifically PEP 730 and 738,
meaning that CPython builds and runs on iOS
and builds and runs on Android.
and that the core development team
considers breaking that build
part of breaking Python.
There's still work to be done
in terms of tooling.
I'm not going to get a Python plugin for Xcode
and drag a storyboard across
and then publish it.
Some of that stuff is coming from the Beware team
backed by Anaconda, which is great.
But I think this announcement is like
the runtime CPython bits
are in place, right?
Yeah, definitely.
So like, yeah, it's not like,
oh, suddenly Xcode just works
and you can just write an Xcode project in Python
just as easily as you would write,
you know, a web app in Python.
But yeah, the fact that it
works
at all,
like the fact that
you can run it on an iPhone
or on an Android phone, that's huge.
And the core developer
team is willing to say,
yeah, this is going to keep working.
They should.
It's not a flash in the pan, these mobile phones.
Some people use them.
Allegedly.
How many do I have around me?
I know.
As I have one
in view.
Yeah, exactly.
Where's the iPads and all the other stuff?
Yeah, if I never see Xcode again in my life,
I would be too soon.
It's just such a bad piece of software.
It's
such a bad tool for building software.
I've had to work with a lot for our mobile apps.
I'm thankfully not having
to dealt with any app development yet in my career.
It's been all web development.
It's such, you don't appreciate the freedom that you have.
I know open source means freedom in some ways,
but just the ability to go, I made a change.
I published it.
The world has it.
It's not like I've had a debate with random people who are in a hurry and don't care about what I've built.
And then they tell me that it infringes on something somebody else built even when that's actually not true because they don't understand what it does.
That's even outside.
A lot more people involved in mobile publishing.
And rules that don't align with your incentives.
Like we want to extract money from you.
Anyway, that's a long story in-app purchases.
Okay.
Another one, I hinted at this, like,
are we going to need to change the name of CPython?
Because CPython means literally the C language implementation of Python.
What do Cordell Albers want from Rust?
And do they want Rust in their CPython?
You know, is this a Reese's Pieces,
Reese's Peanut Butter Cup sort of thing?
You got your Rust in
my C or something, right?
R&P.
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Yeah, this was a really interesting one
because I think that the room was maybe a little bit surprised
by how open core developers were
about maybe the idea of something optional
being in CPython that is written in Rust.
Because CPython, there's the core runtime, right?
There's the syntax, there's the interpreter,
there's all that stuff that everyone uses
on every single Python session.
But then there's also all these standard library modules
like OS and Sys and SSL
and all of these other libraries, right?
And those modules are kind of their own thing.
They're their own little project
that just happens to live inside of CPython.
And I think the result of all of this conversation
of what do core developers want from Rust
was like, hey, let's try something.
Maybe having a standard library extension module
written in Rust.
What would that take?
What would that look like?
Would we need to change the build system?
What would actually need to happen
for that to be a possibility?
I think there's some huge benefits to having Rust.
I mean, David talked about a whole bunch of them where it's like,
it's this new language.
There's lots of new programmers that are interested in it.
It has all the memory safety stuff.
It has all the performance stuff.
The threading.
Yeah.
Free threading works really great with it.
There's just like tons of benefits to having Rust be a part of like a Python,
Python developers toolkit.
And it's like, how can we, can we also have that in the core libraries?
And I think the answer was like, try it out and see what happens.
and maybe who knows, right?
They definitely, like core developers,
caveated it as like,
it'll definitely have to be an optional part
of the standard library
because not everyone is going to be using Rust on CPython.
And yeah, maybe not one of the core parts
of the actual, of the interpreter in the runtime
because they're quite well used,
well maintained right now.
So we'll see.
I think it's going to be interesting to see if David and some other interested folks will put together something like a standard library module that uses Rust.
Yeah, maybe in 2035 we'll still be doing this.
We'll still be talking about how the C adaptive layer to integrate with Rust is working so we can still keep all these C extensions running instead of the other way around.
Yeah, yeah.
A couple of interesting takeaways.
David points out, our best estimate is that somewhere between a quarter and a third of all native code being uploaded to PyPI for new projects is using Rust.
Yeah, so this uses like, basically use this, it's py-code.org, where it can introspect into Python packages, the actual files that are uploaded, and then looks for Rust.
And so any package that is using Rust
and it's a new package or a new release,
you can see what percentage of new projects are using Rust
versus C or C++ or something else.
So David was able to extract that data point.
So yeah, there's a lot of Rust happening for new projects.
Obviously, old projects are likely very C, C++ dominated,
but what are
new Python
developers choosing to use?
Yeah.
they didn't choose C.
They just chose not to rewrite it in Rust yet,
which is a different barrier, I suppose.
Yeah.
Not saying they should, but, you know,
I agree that choosing new projects is an interesting metric.
So a couple other things from here is, like,
should we rewrite CPython in Rust?
There's a lot of people, like, or a lot of comments are, like,
there's a lot of people who just don't want to learn Rust,
they don't care about Rust.
This is a challenge for CPython is that the core developers in particular
have a special skill of writing C and writing CPython in particular.
And this moved the cheese for a lot of folks.
And they, like, how
much do
they care, right?
Like, they took Rust on Linux, Rust and Linux Core as an example, right?
People just, they don't want to change,
which I'm not saying they should, but...
Yeah,
it's a really difficult question,
especially when there's this really tight ownership
of one or a few people
with this very specific part of code.
And they've been maintaining it
for a really long time,
and it's hard to try to force
that sort of change onto people.
But then things that are new
or things that are optional,
that's a really great place to start.
I think learning from the Rust and Linux project
is a really great idea for Python
because it's, in a lot of ways,
even though Linux maybe is an order of magnitude more complexity,
I think that the situation
or the structure of the code in the project
is pretty similar where there's this really big core
and then there's a ton of different smaller subprojects
that all have their own little owners,
governance, contributors happening in the background.
Yeah, 100%.
I mean, it is 2025.
We could try again.
Maybe we could just vibe code it like,
hey, Cursor, rewrite CPython in Rust or you go to jail.
Is
that the meta we say?
There's this really great video.
A senior engineer tries vibe coding.
It's always telling it like if it doesn't do it, it'll go to jail.
But also says please, like, or you go to jail, please.
It's amazing.
I mean, as much as I joke, honestly, I do think AI code assistance could help in supporting the transition.
I know that's good at C and it's good at REST.
Not that you should have high-coded.
That's not what I'm saying.
But anyway, we live in weird times, Zach.
We do.
We
really do.
I think the other constraint here that maybe a lot of people don't track
is that it's not just I need to somehow make CPython work on Linux, Windows, and Mac.
And if we're building Rust, that's a different tool chain.
There are a bunch of edge cases and platforms that are not very commonly used
that maybe Rust itself doesn't even support
that Python has promised to keep running on, right?
Yeah, or, I mean, even if not promised, right?
Like, there's people
that are
just running
on
these platforms,
and then if something were to break,
they would only show up when something breaks.
And what do you do, right?
Like, you've been supporting these people
for a very, very long time, and what happens then?
What stability guarantees do you give those people that, you know,
maybe you're not like a tier one platform, but if
you've been,
you know,
making them use, like they've been using Python totally normally for all this
time, what does that mean?
Yeah. Well, we just talked about tier three iOS and Android support.
Like, does it work there? I have maybe, I don't know,
but you've got like this little micro Python,
circuit Python chip that I got. That's like, I don't know,
the size of a thumb or something.
Does the build system work for that?
I don't know.
But I'm running Python on it today.
Yeah.
I think that one of the things that got identified
was the state of GCC support for Rust
as something interesting.
So that's something to
track
if you're interested in Rust and CPython working together.
That's definitely a project
that's outside of Python and Rust
and Maturin and Pyo-3s
if you want to watch that project.
Yeah.
I did say we need to go faster.
Lightning around.
Close things
out here.
I guess there's really,
there's just the Pyo-dyed.
We didn't talk about the docs
or the lightning talks.
What else should we say
before we call it a wrap on this?
Let's go into the lightning talks
and look at Guido's.
I think that one was the most well-received and interesting lightning talk,
which is contrasting how Python is developed today
versus how it was developed by Guido
and what sorts of things are we kind of like leaving behind
by developing Python in this way
and is there anything that we can learn from
how we use it?
Does he mean more committee, more
community agreement,
or what was he getting at?
I think it's the complexity side was the part that was really big for him,
where it's like we're trying to, if you want to land a feature in CPython,
you need to write a perfect pep, come with a pull request that is, you know,
performant and secure and the API is perfect and it's been vetted and it's been used.
And like there's this super, super high bar to clear to add a feature to CPython.
and you're not allowed to get it wrong
the first go around basically
I think was what he's mentioning
demanding perfection means
it's like the code equivalent of
don't let great be the enemy of the good
or something like that right?
Sure,
yeah exactly
yeah stuff like that where it's like
hey if Python were developed in that way early on
it wouldn't have worked out
because
that...
It'd still be in the lab or an idea or something.
Exactly.
So I think that's a really interesting one to check out
if you're looking at the lightning cost.
Okay, cool.
Now, I know some features have to be absolutely dead center
in the core of the CPython runtime,
like free threading or a no-gil initiative
or some new memory model or whatever.
But a lot of these things probably, certainly with a standard library,
could maybe, you know, you talked about the immutable,
the thread-safe concurrency data structures.
Maybe there's a more formalized path of starting these things
as third-party libraries on PyPI.
And once they reach a certain bar maybe of adoption and maturity,
then they make a step towards that.
It would be interesting if, I know people can just go
and create a project and do it, but here's the prescribed way
of non-C runtime features being added to the language,
and it starts out in public and it makes its way over.
Yeah, I think that got discussed in the last language summit too.
I'm not sure if there's been any progress on actually making a solid model
for here's how you go from PyPI to PEP to standard library,
but I think it's just going to keep coming up until that happens
Because this is really common, right?
Yeah.
So many features get developed this way now.
It's also interesting,
some of the ideas of that direction have been rejected,
like moving requests into
CPython's
standard library
was rejected because it would harm the growth
and status of requests, not CPython.
Even
though request is clearly better
than what's built into CPython for your access.
Throw no shade, that stuff's been around for a long time.
Yeah.
I mean, request is built on it, so it obviously
does some job well.
Yeah, yeah, exactly.
It's just like a more user-friendly, higher-level API in front of it.
And we have HTTPX for concurrent, basically, asyncio requests
equivalent.
So there's certainly history or examples of stuff starting out there,
becoming very popular, but not wanting to go in,
but specifically things that you might want to.
Like, for example, would data classes be a thing
if Pydantic was on a trajectory to sort of fill that role
or adders for
Manic
or something like that, right?
Maybe not.
I don't know.
Yeah.
No, I think that that whole road of experimentation
and then moving into the standard library,
like, we're just going to keep seeing it
because it's such a great way to get stuff
in the hands of users really, really quickly.
Yeah.
And I don't think just, like, if I just went out and made a library,
said, I'm doing a library, and I think it would be fun
to have this as part of Python, like, people go,
good for you, Michael.
And they would ignore it, right?
But if it was a little bit blessed by the steering kit,
like, we're experimenting and considering this idea
as core developers.
It starts here, but if it gains traction, it becomes Python.
I think that is a different positioning
than just, like, a random project that looks interesting.
Yeah, definitely.
I think that last year, one of the things that got suggested was like, hey, maybe we allow people to have those sorts of projects once they reach some amount of maturity and direction to be housed under the Python GitHub org to try to give
them some sort
of legitimacy of like, yeah, this project is on the track to going here and here's us showing that it is.
Yeah.
I feel like I should just say one more thing, though.
I do think there's a lot of value in having Python be smaller
and having a bigger ecosystem outside of it.
I'm not suggesting that everything should just be moved into Python.
I do think that just go like, I don't care what CPython does.
If I like this HTTP library, I'm going to use it.
And if it wants to implement itself in Rust or OCaml or whatever,
I don't care.
If that's better, they can go do that.
And then I'll use it and it'll be great, right?
And that doesn't have to go through committees
and all this kind of stuff.
So I'm not necessarily saying like everything should try
to like find a hub and spoke model into the core Python.
But those things that do intend to be there,
it would be cool to see like this sort of progressive path
that people can get to it sooner.
Anyway.
Final thoughts on that before we call it a show?
I
think we nailed it, honestly.
We definitely did.
Yeah, no, let's wrap it up.
Thank you for doing this write-up.
It's really interesting.
I always value this look into where's Python going.
There's a lot to take from it.
Final thoughts on this year's Language Summit?
It is a really exciting year to be a Python developer.
I think that 3.14, it's got so many really interesting things
and changes to try.
I am quite excited to get my hands on the beta,
but then also the stable releases.
I really am excited to see what people actually then go
and do with the stuff, right?
Like building web apps with Python,
building mobile apps with Python,
building these massively parallel applications with Python.
It's
a pretty good time to be a Python developer right now.
It's only getting better.
Absolutely.
All right, Seth.
Thanks for being back on the show and thanks for doing the write-up.
Thanks for having me.
Yep.
See you later.
Bye.